Integrated and improved direct
hydrocarbon indicators: A step
forward in petroleum risk
discrimination
P. W. Monigle, T. S. Hedayati, and F. J. Goulding
ABSTRACT
In petroleum exploration, discriminating between success and
failure is essential to constructing a successful exploration port-
folio. Economic evaluations for individual prospects rely heavily
on both chance of success (COS) and materiality to build a com-
mercial portfolio. Where subsurface geophysical response is
amenable, incorporating direct hydrocarbon indicator (DHI)
observations have been shown to improve risk characterization
and success rates. In recent years, industry has explored more
challenging geological traps with subtle geophysical responses
(i.e., Guyana–Suriname) that require evolving approaches. This
paper describes a step change in the DHI evaluation process and
integration with geological risk linked to volume estimation.
More recently, the DHI evaluation process adopted
expectation-based metrics and now leverages machine learning
for scoring, which leads to improved accuracy, while mitigating
human bias. These adaptations allow the process to be more
broadly applicable across a global portfolio of prospects. Dis-
cernibility, an innovative metric, describes the expectations and
conﬁdence in geophysical observations and helps guide both risking
and resource estimation. A signi ﬁcant challenge to predictability
involves reconciling contradictory information between geological
and geophysical observations. Applying the new integrated work-
ﬂow, geoscientists integrate geological and geophysical observations
through a Bayesian framework guided by discernibility. This
framework allows for integration of all observations into a single
COS value in a simple, repeatable manner. Benchmarking stud-
ies indicate that this new approach is ?50% better at discrimi-
nating success from failure and is ?30% more accurate over
prior workﬂows.
Copyright ©2025. The American Association of Petroleum Geologists. All rights reserved. Gold Open
Access. This paper is published under the terms of the CC-BY license.
Manuscript received March 29, 2024; provisional acceptance June 14, 2024; revised manuscript
received October 8, 2024; revised provisional acceptance February 12, 2025; second revised
manuscript received March 13, 2025; ﬁnal acceptance March 28, 2025.
DOI:10.1306/04042524030
AAPG Bulletin, v. 109, no. 5 (May 2025), pp. 617 –636 617
AUTHORS
P. W. Monigle ~ ExxonMobil Upstream
Company, Spring, Texas; patrick.w.
monigle@exxonmobil.com
Patrick Monigle is a geophysical advisor at
ExxonMobil with 10 years of experience in
petroleum geoscience, encompassing
exploration, development, and research with
notable expertise in the Guyana–Suriname
Basin. His academic journey took him from
N CS t a t et oO r e g o nS t a t eU n i v e r s i t y ,w h e r e
he earned his Ph.D. in geophysics in 2014.
His interests include geophysical reservoir
characterization, hydrocarbon response, and
the integration/intersection of geophysical
methods, geomodeling, and stratigraphic
analysis.
T. S. Hedayati ~ ExxonMobil Upstream
Company, Spring, Texas; tiffany.s.
hedayati@exxonmobil.com
Tiffany Hedayati is a geoscience advisor at
ExxonMobil with 16 years of experience in
petroleum geoscience, spanning roles from
exploration to production and specializing in
risk analysis. She earned her geoscience
degree from The University of Texas at
Austin in 2008. She is dedicated to
accurately characterizing risks and
quantifying subsurface prospects. Her
m i s s i o ni st or e v o l u t i o n i z ea n ds t a n d a r d i z e
risk analysis across exploration, driving more
informed and confident decision-making.
F. J. Goulding ~ ExxonMobil Technology
and Engineering Company, Spring, Texas;
frank.j.goulding@exxonmobil.com
Frank J. Goulding is the chief geoscientist at
ExxonMobil, bringing 37 years of experience
in petroleum geoscience across exploration,
development, production, and research
assignments. He graduated from the
University of Calgary with a degree in
geophysics in 1987. His interests include
seismic interpretation, hydrocarbon
response, stratigraphy, and production and
development geoscience.
Downloaded from http://pubs.geoscienceworld.org/aapg/aapgbull/article-pdf/109/5/617/7232867/bltn24030.pdf by guest on 01 June 2026